---
layout: event
title: Group Discussion
pseudo_title: Group Discussion
modified:
categories: events
excerpt:
tags: []
image:
  feature:
date: 2016-08-23T23:17:25+00:00
day: 23
month: AUG
status: Finished
---

The GD began with a very interesting game. The game is as follows,
It is a 2 player game: each player chooses a number from 1 - 9 and each number chosen should not be previously chosen by any of the two players. If the last three numbers adds to 15 the player wins. Does there exist a winning strategy.


**Solution:** There is no winning strategy. Its analogous to playing tic-tac-toe on a magic square hence no solution.


###EPR Paradox
Then we started discussing the EPR Paradox: [Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen]( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPR_paradox ) and gave the famous example of two particles starting from the same position and moving in the opposite direction such that the total momentum of the system in zero. Now the weird part of this is that if one measures the position of any one of the particles when both the particles are very far apart that transmission of information takes a significant time, we would know the position of the other particle too (by momentum conservation). Likewise, the measurement of position of the second system will determine the measurement of position of the first system, even though the systems are no longer physically linked in the traditional sense of local coupling.

The act of measuring a observable of a system not only makes it’s wave function to collapse but even the wave function of the other system to collapse instantaneously. Here we see that the fundamental postulate of Special Theory of Relativity that there is a maximum speed of information to travel being violated. And hence the paradox.

Also the famous example of entangled spins was discussed which can be read [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPR_paradox).

###Arrow’s Theorem
The discussion then continued to Arrow’s theorem where students gave the statement of the theorem and described the fair rules.

A basic statement of the theorem is as follows:
Arrow's theorem says that if the decision-making body has at least two members and at least three options to decide among, then it is impossible to design a social welfare function that satisfies all these conditions (assumed to be reasonable requirement of a fair voting system) at once:

A simple description of the conditions/the fair rules are as follows
  * If every voter prefers alternative X over alternative Y, then the group prefers X over Y.
  * If every voter's preference between X and Y remains unchanged, then the group's preference between X and Y will also remain unchanged (even if voters' preferences between other pairs like X and Z, Y and Z, or Z and W change).
  * There is no "dictator": no single voter possesses the power to always determine the group's preference.

A very interesting and simple informal proof is given [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrow%27s_impossibility_theorem)!


### Maxwell's Demon

The discussion then was shifted to Maxwell’s demon. One can see the following video by khan academy in which he has described the problem very nicely.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/aKRDvSZ-igA" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>  

Also, dicussions led to the [Szilard’s Engine](http://www.quantumcomplexity.org/tutorials/knowledge-is-power-the-energy-content-of-bits/).

###LTP

Time for some mind-boggling LTPs to puzzle the group. So one of the LTPs were as follows:

*At an ancient museum, a burglary takes place. The thief was caught by the security and accused of the robbery. (Declaring him as the thief, we mean that he is the thief.) But according to the law, every citizen gets a chance to call his/her lawyer before trial or imprisonment. The thief calls his/her lawyer. The lawyer arrives and walks away with the thief,lawfully.!
So What happened exactly?*

<hr>
